---
title: "Recall and Tools Like It Are Bad If They're Effective (draft)"
date: 2025-07-27
author: "Hanif Bin Ariffin"
draft: false
---

When Microsoft announced Recall, the immediate backlash focused on privacy concerns and security vulnerabilities.
Critics are worried about hackers accessing screenshots of everything you've ever done on your computer. They worried
about
sensitive information being stored in plaintext databases.

But I think we're missing the bigger picture. The real problem with Recall isn't that it might be hacked or misused. The
real problem is what happens if it works exactly as intended.

## The Efficiency Trap

There's a perverse relationship between surveillance technology and its effectiveness. The worse these tools work, the
more tolerable they become. When facial recognition has a 30% error rate, it's annoying but manageable. When it reaches
99.9% accuracy, it becomes something entirely different.

Recall promises to be frighteningly effective. It will take screenshots every few seconds, analyze them with AI, and
build a searchable database of everything you've ever seen or done on your computer. The demo shows someone asking, "
What
was that blue dress I looked at last week?" and instantly finding it among thousands of images.

This isn't surveillance that might catch you doing something wrong. This is surveillance that will definitely catch you
doing everything.

## The Panopticon's Promise

Jeremy Bentham's panopticon was a theoretical prison where guards could observe all prisoners without the prisoners
knowing whether they were being watched. The prisoners would modify their behavior because they might be under
observation.

Recall eliminates the "might." You know you're always being watched because the system tells you so. Every click, every
scroll, every moment of distraction is being recorded and catalogued. The computer knows when you checked social media
during work hours, how long you spent reading that article, what websites you visit when you think no one is looking.

The psychological effect isn't theoretical anymore. It's guaranteed.

## When Perfect Memory Becomes Perfect Control

Here's what makes effective recall technology particularly insidious: it doesn't just watch what you do, it changes what
you're willing to do.

Knowing that every website you visit is being recorded, would you still browse that embarrassing hobby forum? Would you
still look up that medical condition you're worried about? Would you still read that politically incorrect article you
found interesting?

The chilling effect isn't about doing anything illegal or even wrong. It's about the thousands of small moments of
curiosity, exploration, and private thought that make us human.

When the technology works perfectly, self-censorship becomes automatic.

## The Infrastructure of Oppression

But let's think bigger than individual privacy. What happens when this technology becomes ubiquitous?

Recall-like systems create the infrastructure for control that would make authoritarian regimes salivate. Once every
computer is already recording everything its user does, the technical barriers to surveillance disappear. All that's
left are policy barriers, and policies can change overnight.

Today it's your personal search history. Tomorrow it could be fed into social credit systems, employment algorithms, or
criminal prediction models. The data is already there, structured and waiting.

The effectiveness of the technology isn't a bug in this scenario. It's the entire point.

## The Normalization Engine

Perhaps most concerning is how quickly we adapt to being watched. Tools like Recall don't just observe behavior, they
normalize surveillance itself.

When your computer is already recording everything you do for your own convenience, additional monitoring starts to feel
reasonable. Why shouldn't your employer have access to help with productivity? Why shouldn't law enforcement use it to
solve crimes? Why shouldn't insurance companies factor it into risk assessments?

Each step feels logical in isolation. The sum total is a society where privacy becomes not just impractical, but
incomprehensible.

## The Broken Promise of Convenience

Microsoft markets Recall as a productivity tool. Never lose track of something you've seen again! Find any document, any
image, any conversation with natural language search!

But convenience built on total surveillance isn't convenience at all. It's a trade-off that fundamentally changes the
nature of computing from a tool you control to a system that controls you.

The more effective Recall becomes at helping you find things, the more effective it becomes at helping others find
things about you.

## When Bad Implementation Is Good Policy

This is why I find myself in the strange position of hoping that surveillance technologies like Recall remain buggy,
unreliable, and ineffective. Not because I want Microsoft to fail, but because failed surveillance is less dangerous
than successful surveillance.

A recall system that only captures 50% of your activity accurately is annoying but livable. A system that captures 99.9%
effectively ends privacy as we know it.

The technical challenges aren't barriers to adoption. They're the only things standing between us and a future where
every moment of digital life is recorded, analyzed, and potentially weaponized.

## The Questions We Should Be Asking

Instead of debating whether Recall's implementation is secure enough, maybe we should be asking whether we want this
capability to exist at all.

Is the convenience of perfect digital memory worth the cost of perfect digital surveillance? Can we build systems that
help us without watching us? Do we even remember what privacy feels like anymore?

The answers to these questions matter more than the technical specifications. Because once we've built the
infrastructure of total recall, we can't easily unbuild it.

And if it works as well as promised, we might not want to anymore.